Hi, and welcome to our last lecture in
regression models for data science.
Part of our data science specialization.
In this lecture,
I just hope to motivate you to continue to
learn regression models and linear models,
generalize linear models because of their
extreme importance for data analysis.
and I just wanted to show you a couple of
things that at least I find interesting of
ways in which we can extend and
even further than maybe we thought.
So the first thing that came to my mind
when thinking about extending linear
models was how that we can fit complicated
functions using regression models.
So we've seen a little bit in how to
do this by adding squared and cubic or
polynomial terms into our regression model
so that we can fit lower order functions.
However imagine if you have a complicated
function like a sine curve or
something that looks
maybe like a sine curve.
How would you fit that
non-parametrically using a linear model?
So we might specify our model
as Y is now equal to f of x
plus epsilon where f might
be a complicated function.
Well it turns out that there is
a pretty easy way to do this and
what I'm going to show you
is a simple first step.
There is entire literature
in how to do this and
were just going to go over
in some of the basics.
So, first step would be the use
something called regression spawns.
So we're going to, our model for
Y = f(X) + epsilon
is going to be Y equal to an intercept,
beta naught,
plus a line term called
a regular slope term,
beta1 times X1, but
then a bunch of terms like this
where it's the sum of a bunch
of terms of x minus a naught
point with a little plus
at the bottom times gamma.
And I'll show you in a second
what these actually mean.
So the function with a little plus,
that just returns
the argument if that argument's
positive and it returns zero otherwise.
And these little terms, 1 up to d,
those are naught points.
So what we're going to do
is we're going to take,
imagine a stick that if you break
it it just created a kink in it.
Okay, rather that breaking it apart,
you create a kink in it.
So what we're going to do is imagine
we want to fit our function.
So imagine if our data would
something like that and
we have a stick, and
want to fit this function.
We might break it at
a couple points like that.
So this is the idea.
We're going to actually
mathematically model those breaks.
And that's what these little
plus functions do and
so I argue down here that
if you're interested,
you can just prove yourself that
this function is continuous.
It doesn't have split,
you can draw this without ever
lifting up your piece of chalk.
Okay?
And so, I think the easiest way to show
this would be to go through an example.
And in this example I just simulate
data that's a sine curve plus noise,
and you can see that in
the blue points on the plot.
So what I'm going to do is
grab a bunch of naughts, so
that's a bunch of the break
points where the line will be
continuous but not smooth at those points.
So I calculate 20 of those points and
I just equally space them along
the range of data that I've collected.
And then I show exactly here
how to create my naught terms,
just executing that function
that I had on the previous page.
You can replicate this function and
you can see there it's pretty easy.
So now I have a matrix
of these naught terms.
And I then create my x matrix by adding an
intercept term that's just a constant, my
slope coefficient term, which is just the
x by itself, and then these spline terms.
Then I just fiddle in your model.
Y is this collection of predictors.
I took out the intercept because I
included the intercept in my x matrix.
Okay?
And then I show my fitted plot.
And you can see, it looks pretty good,
it actually fits the sine curve very well.
The only thing that's a little bothersome
is that we know the sine curve that
we're trying to fit is likely smooth and
this is very
sharp at these at this naught points.
And the way that that happens
mathematically is the function that we've
used is continuous but
it's not continuously differentiable.
If we took the derogative,
it's the derivative is not continuous.
And so we can actually do a pretty
simple trick and get a continuous
derivative of the naught points and
make them nice and smooth looking, so
it doesn't look like we're breaking
the stick at each one of these points.
Instead it looks like we're
drawing a smooth curve.
It's very easy to just add square terms,
is all we have to do.
So now our function is y equals
beta naught plus beta 1 x,
plus we add a square term,
beta 2 x squared, and
then you see we're using our same function
as before, only we're squaring it.
Okay, so instead of having x minus the
naught points with a little plus symbol,
instead of just using that, we're squaring
it, which just means If the axis is
further along than the naught point,
then return that difference and square it.
Okay if it's naught then just return zero.
So that's what that function is.
I give you the term here and
you can see our code is identical with
the exception of, I'm just squaring
the eventuality that our x is further
along than each of the naught points.
And I've added an x squared term.
Okay?
And then now when I fit it,
you can see now the curve is nice and
smooth.
And notice all we've done in this
process is just ordinary regression.
So, we fit a pretty complicated function,
with just ordinary regression in
putting a bunch of naught points.
Now this is a pretty basic version of
regression spines or basic version of
spines called regression spines and there
some problems we have to know exactly
where the naught points, we have to know
what where we put the naught points.
There's potentially a problem if
we put too many naught points.
There's potentially a problem
if we put too few naught points.
And so there are some solutions for
that, and
in fact i have some notes on
the next page that cover this.
So the first thing I'd like to
point out in these notes is that,
this collection of sine terms,
it's called a basis.
It means it's the collection of
building blocks for functions and
this is just one way to create a set
of building blocks for functions.
There's a lot of other ways and in fact
we're going to cover another way here in
a minute but, this is one of the more
popular ones, these regressors lines and
there's ways you can extend this
to make them even more useful.
But I would just say, people spend a lot
of time thinking about these things.
And there's a lot of different kinds
of basis that you can look at, and
each basis has its strengths and
weaknesses.
Some of the most notable
bases are the Fourier basis,
that we'll talk about a little bit
in a slide, the wavelet basis and
then spline basis like the ones that
we're just considering there, and
there's a lot of different
kinds of spline basis.
Another thing is, if you want to
fit data that looks like that,
you can just have one naught point.
If you know where that naught point is
exactly, you can just have the one naught
point, add it in and you can get
a hockey stick like model out of this.
Now, that might be controversial if,
you have to know that it's really a hockey
stick and an abrupt change like that.
But if you really know that and
you want to do that, you could fit
a hockey stick model with this approach.
There's nothing particular to
doing these in just linear models.
We could do them in generalized linear
models as well and just specify
the regression's in the linear predictor,
and that's all that it takes.
So in addition to showing you how to fit
non linear functions in linear models,
we've basically just showed you how to
do it in generalized linear models too.
So, like I said a very consistent problem
with this is that we don't know where
the naught points are, there's a problem
of putting in too few, there's a problem
of putting in too many so, the modern
solution to this problem is to put in lots
and lots and lots of naught points,
add a so called regularization term.
The rationalization term will penalize
the coefficients from the spline terms,
will penalize larger coefficients, so
it keeps the number of
parameters in check and
so that's in more advance topic but if you
take some more advance linear models or
regression modeling classes
they'll cover that.
So anyway, now you have some basics
to how you could fit an interesting
nonlinear function using linear
models in generalized linear models.
And for the time being,
you'll have to play around with the naught
placement and how many naughts you put in.
And then I would suggest taking some other
classes in linear models to extend this.
So let's move on to the next example,
the final example for the class.
I wanted to talk about how you can make
another basis, the Fourier basis and
how you could try to model
harmonics using the Fourier basis.
So I thought of this simple exercise.
Imagine a scale, a major scale is just
kind of thing that you've heard of.
Do re mi fa so la ti do.
Just like that.
The standard.
That's a octave eight notes and a chord is
three notes played together so,
any play any chord is if you hear
someone strum a guitar or play three notes
in the piano, they're playing a chord.
So, I wondered if someone
play a chord continuously.
For well, a little bit of time and
we had it digitized and recorded and
brought in to R.
Would R be able to figure out what
chord it, what the notes were?
So that would tell
exactly what chord it is.
All it got was a sound.
It couldn't tell us what chord it was.
So here, I took this data,
or I generated the data, but
I got the frequencies for
the various notes off a webpage,
and this is the frequencies if you start
on the middle C key on a piano and
go up one octave to the C key again.
Okay.
So that's probably the, I don't know,
maybe the most important
part of the piano.
I don't know.
And, so, what I've done is
that I've taken this notes and
then I've created a digitally
sampled time points.
So, here I did,
the time goes from zero to two.
And it and it,
I'm saying sampled every .001.
So let's say it's two seconds.
So if two seconds of data,
and, I created three notes.
A C, an E, and a G.
I created those notes by just creating
a sine wave at that frequency.
And you could, R doesn't really
have the capability of doing this,
but it's actually pretty
easy to do in Map Lab.
You could,
if you were to take these frequencies.
And save them in a file and
you know, wave file and play them.
It would you know,
sound like a very digital sound at
the right note of that key would
sound like [SOUND] like that.
Okay?
And so to build our chord,
you just add these three notes together.
So there I build my cord by adding my c,
e, and my g notes together.
That's a c major chord.
And now what I want to know is,
here I have a chord, and
if I could save it as a wave file and
play it, it would sound like a chord.
And what I want to know is,
can R detect what chord it is?
Okay, so what I did, is I created a basis
that was all the sine functions for
every note.
So, eight sine functions, okay?
And then, I fit a linear model with
my chord, my chord as an outcome.
The sine functions as my predictors,
and I got rid of the intercept because
everything is centered to have means here,
okay.
So let's see what happens
when I plot the coefficients.
So here I've plotted the coefficients and
I've connected them with a line, and
you see that R does it correctly and
it estimates the c, the e and
the g chord as having very
large coefficients and
all the rest of of them are kind of small,
relatively speaking.
So if you were to do this,
you would be able to guess the chord.
Now this only covers the sine part, but
there could also be a cosine
component to the note as well.
And so there is an automated way.
Let's do a fairly automatic way
to fit all the possible sins and
cosine terms for a you know two
seconds of digitally sampled music and
that's called the discrete
Fourier transform.
All the Discrete Fourier Transform is
doing is exactly what we're doing here.
It's fitting a linear model,
but it has all,
not just the sine terms, but all of the
cosine terms, but all of the possible ones
that that time series will allow at
the rate at which it's been sampled.
So it has a so-called
completely saturated model.
So, it has,
if you have a thousand time points sample,
it has a thousand
coefficients in the model.
And so, the discreet Fourier transform
really just fits this linear model,
it does and kind of interesting way with
complex numbers and that sort of thing.
But that's all that the discrete
Fourier transform is doing.
And so it would fit both the sine
terms and the cosine terms.
But if you were to plot the output
of the discrete Fourier transform,
I'll just show you how
to do it right here.
A is just my FFT of my court, and
here I'm plotting because the FFT does
this calculation with imaginary numbers.
I'm just plotting the square
real components of the magic,
of the,
of the discreet variance transform.
And you can see it loads on
three very specific frequencies.
You could back calculate
what those frequencies are,
and those are the frequencies of C,
E, and G.
So the C major chord.
So and that's actually a very common thing
to do in music and sound processing.
So if you were to take a sound signal
a section of a sound signal and
do a discrete fourier transform and
plot the so called spectrum which is what
this is, that is what sound
engineers do all the time.
And ultimately underneath the hood
what they're doing is a linear model
with a lot of sin and
cosine terms in the, as regressors.
I should say that the discovery of the
Discrete Fourier Transform was a larger
advance, and that the fact that
the reason people do the calculation
with the Fourier Transform rather than
the linear model is because there was
a discovery by a very famous statistician
named Tucci who discovered a way
to do the Fourier transform very quickly,
the so-called fast way Fourier transform.
That's what everyone uses.
It's I think, you can prove,
it's about as fast as you can
take the Fourier transform.
It's much faster than doing the linear
model, and that's why, if you were a sound
engineer, you wouldn't think of it as
a linear model problem, you would think of
this as a Fourier transform problem, and
you would take fast Fourier transforms.
So, that's in the end of the class,
but I hope in this lecture,
what you've seen is, one, a case where
we can fit pretty complicated functions
with a couple of lines of code of a couple
of lines of our code very easily.
Secondly, an instance where we can do
something that maybe at first blush,
we would've thought maybe that's not
really in the scope of what linear models
can do in diagnosing what
are the various notes of a chord.
That's something we just wouldn't
naturally think a linear model could do.
We showed that not only are both of those
things possible with linear models,
they're actually kind of easy
with linear models, it's not
reams of code we had to do, there was, you
know six or seven lines at the most for
each of these examples which
includes generating the data.
So that just goes to show how
powerful these techniques are and so
I hope you've enjoyed the class and
I especially hope that you take the
knowledge from this class and build on it.
If you were to build on it
my suggestion would be to
learn a little bit more about
generalizing your models.
because we only touched
on them in this class.
And the second thing would be to approach
correlated data and longitudinal data.
Another divergent aspect of linear
models that's quite important.
Everything we've done is
independent errors and
data that were exchangeable at some level.
A very important subset is
when that doesn't happen.
If we measure, take measurements,
on a large collection of siblings,
the measurements between the siblings
are going to be closer together
than a different pair of siblings.
So handling that correlation
is a big part of generalizing
linear models to a broad
collection of important topics.
So if I were to suggest two ways to go
further with this stuff, that would be it,
generalized linear models, and
longitudinal multi-level data.
So thanks again for taking the class,
and make sure to look for
us, me, Jeff Leak, and
Roger Pang on Twitter.
For any interesting new stuff that's
coming out of the data science lab here,
our data science program.
We have some other programs
coming out along the way.
And so, we'll post them all on twitter and
other social media stuff.
If you like what we've done in
the data science specialization,
we've got a lot more coming.
So thanks again.